Working Paper
Causal Models and Exploratory Analysis in
Heterogeneous Information Fusion for
Detecting Potential Terrorists
Paul K. Davis, David Manheim, Walter L. Perry, and John S. Hollywood
RAND National Security Research Division
WR-1124
November 2015
RAND working papers are intended to share researchers’ latest findings and to solicit informal peer review. They have been
approved for circulation by (name of RAND research unit) but have not been formally edited or peer reviewed. Unless otherwise
indicated, working papers can be quoted and cited without permission of the author, provided the source is clearly referred to as a
working paper. RAND’s publications do not necessarily reflect the opinions of its research clients and sponsors. RAND® is a
registered trademark.
Decision Making Under Deep Uncertainty 2015, Delft
ii
Preface
This Working Paper was prepared for the third annual Workshop on Decisionmaking Under
Deep Uncertainty, to be held in Delft, the Netherlands, November 3-5, 2015. The Working Paper
is based on a RAND report that will be published shortly. Informal comments on the Working
Paper are welcome and should be addressed to me at pdavis@rand.org.
This research was conducted within the International Security and Defense Policy Center of
the RAND National Security Research Division (NSRD). NSRD conducts research and analysis
on defense and national security topics for the U.S. and allied defense, foreign policy, homeland
security, and intelligence communities and foundations and other non-governmental
organizations that support defense and national security analysis. For more information on the
International Security and Defense Policy Center, see http://www.rand.org/nsrd/ndri/centers.
Decision Making Under Deep Uncertainty 2015, Delft
iii
Table of Contents
Preface............................................................................................................................................. ii
Abstract ........................................................................................................................................... 1
1 Introduction .............................................................................................................................. 1
2 Top-Level Analytical Architecture .......................................................................................... 2
3 Representing Heterogeneous Information ............................................................................... 4
3.1 Types of Information ........................................................................................................ 4
3.2 Representing Uncertainty.................................................................................................. 4
4 Causal Social-Science Models in Counterterrorism ................................................................ 6
5 A Mixed-Methods Battery of Fusion Methods ...................................................................... 11
6 Data ........................................................................................................................................ 12
7 Designing and Implementing a Platform for Exploratory Analysis ...................................... 13
8 Illustrative Results and Conclusions ...................................................................................... 17
8.1 Results ............................................................................................................................. 17
8.2 Conclusions ..................................................................................................................... 18
Acknowledgments......................................................................................................................... 19
References ..................................................................................................................................... 19
Author Biographies ....................................................................................................................... 20
Decision Making Under Deep Uncertainty 2015, Delft
1
Abstract
We describe research fusing heterogeneous information in an effort eventually to detect
terrorists, reduce false alarms, and exonerate those falsely identified. The specific research is
more humble, using synthetic data and first versions of fusion methods. Both the information and
the fusion methods are subject to deep uncertainty. The information may also be fragmentary,
indirect, soft, conflicting, and even deceptive. We developed a research prototype of an analyst-
centric fusion platform. This uses (1) causal computational models rooted in social science to
relate observable information about individuals to an estimate of the threat that the individual
poses and (2) a battery of different methods to fuse across information reports. We account for
uncertainties about the causal model, the information, and the fusion methods. We address
structural and parametric uncertainties, including uncertainties about the uncertainties, at
different levels of detail. We use a combination of (1) probabilistic and parametric methods, (2)
alternative models, and (3) alternative fusion methods that include nonlinear algebraic
combination, Bayesian inference, and an entropy-maximizing approach. This paper focuses
primarily on dealing with deep uncertainty in multiple dimensions.
1 Introduction
This paper has substantive and methodological purposes. Substantively, we describe basic
research on using information fusion to assess whether individuals pose a terrorism threat.
Methodologically, we illustrate how causal social-science models can be used as part of doing
so. We also describe our analytical architecture for exploratory analysis under multi-dimensional
deep uncertainty.
Earlier work reviewed technologies for using behavioral observations as part of threat
detection (Davis, Perry, Brown, Jeung, et al, 2013). A conclusion was that some of the
technologies were promising, but magic bullets were unlikely and future success would probably
depend on greatly improving methods for information fusion. Unlike fusion in many domains,
however, the information in question is mixed in character and often both complex and soft—
i.e., qualitative, subjective, fuzzy, or ambiguous. It is likely also to be uncertain, conflicting, and
sometimes deliberately deceptive. Further, the underlying phenomena are more poorly
understood than in physics problems. All of this motivated our current research, the report for
which is in the publications process (Davis, et al., forthcoming).
We sought to build a prototype system that would fuse reports on an individual to be assessed
as a possible terrorist threat. It should, we concluded:
(1) Address matters probabilistically (how likely is it that the individual poses some degree
of threat?);
Decision Making Under Deep Uncertainty 2015, Delft
2
(2) Employ causal social-science models as part of the fusion;
(3) Use a mixed-methods approach to span the range of reasonable causal relationships and
fusion methods;
(4) Have competitive streams of analysis because results depend on human imagination and
judgment;
(5) Design for routine exploratory analysis under deep uncertainty; and
(6) Embody the system in a comprehensible analyst-centric computer platform that would
facilitate review, debate, and eventual sharing and re-use.
We focused on terrorism, but the research should be relevant to law enforcement, intelligence,
and other domains. Our approach is very different from machine-driven mining of information
from “Big Data.”
Subsequent sections describe our analytical architecture, representation of heterogeneous
information and related uncertainties, causal models, mix of fusion methods, creation of
synthetic data for testing, and implementation challenges. We end with illustrative results and
conclusions.
2 Top-Level Analytical Architecture
Figure 1 shows the conceptual analytical architecture, which embodies the characteristics
identified above. When assessing an individual for the degree to which he poses a threat of
terrorism, information derives from various sources as shown on the far left (1). It must be
“interpreted” to create the inputs needed for subsequent processing (2). The interpreted data then
enters the several separate streams of analysis, with different causal models and variants (3).
Information result is then fused (4), drawing on an entire suite of methods and tools. The results,
by method, are passed along for comparisons and for refinement of analysis with case-dependent
tuning (5)-(6), This leads to results (7), which are also starting points for iteration with new
information or the revisiting of old raw data (9). In the future, the analysis will also used to
identify priorities for obtaining new information to sharpen analysis (8).
Decision Making Under Deep Uncertainty 2015, Delft
3
Figure 1. Top-Level System Vision
An important element (6) is labeled “interface model.” This is where the analyst can change
elements of the fusion process, perhaps to reflect different interpretations of the original raw data
or to generate displays responsive to high-level questions that have to be mapped into the inputs
of the fusion system. To illustrate, suppose that several “stories” are floating around in peoples’
heads about how to understand the information coming in. These might be akin to what a
detective novel might call different theories of the case. They may also stem from intuition or
biases, depending on perspective. If they are made explicit, then an “interface model” can be
written that says, e.g., “If we want to see things through the lens of story 1, then …” As indicated
in Figure 2, this may affect some of the priors for Bayesian analysis, the form of some input
probability distributions, the way in which missing information is dealt with, and parameter
settings. It can also cause the analyst to look harder at some fusion methods than others. Much of
this corresponds to nontrivial 1:n mappings requiring knowledge, imagination, and artistry. We
should never imagine that such information fusion is a mechanical and objective process.
Figure 2. How Different “Stories” Can Affect Fusion
Decision Making Under Deep Uncertainty 2015, Delft
4
3 Representing Heterogeneous Information
3.1 Types of Information
Heterogeneous information comes from different sources (e.g., detection devices, digital
records, and human sources) and also varies in character. It can be complex and “soft”—i.e.,
qualitative, subjective, fuzzy, or ambiguous—and also contradictory or even deceptive. Human
sources sometimes lie, sometimes to curry favor and sometimes with malicious intent. Sensor
data and archival digital records can simply be wrong. Information can also be complex, as in
“He is either a committed terrorist or a good-hearted naïf in bad company where he acts as he is
expected to act in that group. I’m not sure which” (resulting in a bimodal probability
distribution). Another example would be “I’m not sure whether his motivation for the cause is
high or very high, but it’s up there.”
The problems of dealing with complex information have been discussed for decades, some of
it debating about Bayesian, Dempster-Shafer, Possibility Theory, Dezert-Smarandache Theory,
and other methods; some of it in connection with “fuzzy mathematics.” We constructed a lengthy
list of complex information types to challenge ourselves. We found that we could represent all
the classes of complex information with the methods that we adopted. These included (1) going
beyond binary thinking; (2) using probability distributions for report data; (3) using causal
models; (4) using fusion methods that allow inequalities and either promote convergence or
preserve distinctions, depending on context; (5) representing qualitative variables on a common
0 to 10 scale (or its discrete version {1.3.5.7.9}); and (6) characterizing the credibility and
salience of information elements. In principle, these can also be achieved with a more complex
Bayesian-network approach.
3.2 Representing Uncertainty
Representing uncertainty was a major issue. We had to deal with model uncertainty
(structural uncertainty) and parametric uncertainty. These, however, appeared in numerous
places as indicated by Table 1. We had various causal models, fusion methods, and ways to
combine them (a meta-model of fusion). Even when dealing with structural uncertainty, we also
had parametric choices. And, as discussed in Figures 1 and 2, we needed some models of our
data to deal with higher-level issues and questions.
We used a variety of methods to deal with uncertainty (Table 2) and were careful to maintain
distinctions between source data and methods used. Multiple methods were applied for each
uncertainty type: we varied parameter values; we employed probability distributions, both for
representing gaps in knowledge and effects of random processes; and we used combinations. We
used alternative causal and fusion models. And, finally, we used interface models. Other authors
have encountered the same issues and made some of the same distinctions (Walker, Lempert, and
Kwakkel; Bankes, Lempert, and Popper, 2005), but it did appear that we had more than usual
Decision Making Under Deep Uncertainty 2015, Delft
5
complexity. This was because we had no constraints—no sponsor insisting that we worry about
only some uncertainties. We also wanted to make the various choices easy for an analyst to
adjust, which can be difficult with other methods for exploratory analysis.
Table 1. Types of Uncertainty or Disagreement for Different Elements of Platform
Type of
Uncertainty
Causal model of
phenomenon
Causal-model
data
Model of
causal-model
data
Fusion model Data for fusion
model (tuning
parameters)
Structural • • •
Parametric • • • •
As indicated in Table 2, we distinguished between uncertainties due to random processes and
uncertainties due to lack of knowledge. Both can be represented by probability distributions, but
they are different and the differences matter. This was a continuing source of confusion because
many researchers refer to both classes in terms of random variables without noting subtleties
involved (e.g., the need to use mixture distributions for some of the work).
Decision Making Under Deep Uncertainty 2015, Delft
6
Table 2. Methods for Dealing with Uncertainty
Mechanism Causal model of
phenomenon
Causal-model
data
Model of
causal-model
data
Fusion model Data for fusion
model
Deterministic
parameter
variation
• •
Chunky
variations
(e.g., different
data tables)
••• ••• •••
Probability
distributions for
knowledge
•••
Probability
distributions for
random
processes
•
Alternative
models ••• •••
Interface model ••• •••
4 Causal Social-Science Models in Counterterrorism
The causes for an individual becoming a terrorist are complex and only partially understood.
To compound this uncertainty, if an individual is being evaluated for the threat of terrorism he
poses, the evidence is likely to be about observed or inferred attributes that might suggest that he
represents some degree of threat (to include zero). For example, he might have military expertise
with explosives and a high degree of interest in radical Islamic philosophy. To use available
information, we needed a causal model rooted in social science to represent causal factors and
their effects.
An earlier review of scholarly social science bearing on terrorism synthesized in terms of
easy-to-understand “factor trees” identifying the factors contributing in a causal way to terrorism
and public support thereof (Davis and Cragin 2009). Factor trees are “thinking models” to
structure reasoning and discussion. Case studies were then conducted to test or “validate” a
particular factor tree, that for public support of terrorism. This factor tree (Figure 3) held up well
as a general qualitative theory with myriad context-specific specializations (Davis, Larson, et al.,
Decision Making Under Deep Uncertainty 2015, Delft
7
2012). The study discussed what “validation” does and does not mean in such work, a matter of
interest to all concerned with deep uncertainty. It is one thing to validate that a model has
captured the right factors; it is quite another to predict combined consequences.
The first point from Figure 3 is that a given higher level factor such as motivation can have
many sources: religious zealotry is one, but so also the sources may be a sense of identity, a
desire for glory and excitement, or a sense of duty. Recognizing such multiple causes changes
discussion from arguing about which single cause is correct to something more realistic. The
second point is that factor tree use “~ands” to indicate that, to a first approximation, where all of
the contributing factors need to be present if the factor to which they contribute is to be
significant. They use “ors” to indicate where any or all of contributing factors may be sufficient
to create the higher-level factor (i.e., where the contributing factors are substitutable).
Figure 3 is a multi-resolution model (MRM) (Davis 2003): one can specify inputs at the top
level, at the level with four main factors, at the next more detailed level, etc. Making such
relationships explicit is very helpful conceptually and also for empirical analysis. In empirical
work, whether using real-world or model-generated data, higher level factors are good theory-
informed abstractions. Those—not simple-hypothesis variables—should often be the core of
multivariate regression.
Factor trees are qualitative, but it proved possible subsequently to build a computational
model based on the factor tree of Figure 3. This was an unusual computational model, however.
It was developed exclusively for exploratory analysis under deep uncertainty, rather than making
best-estimate predictions (Davis and O'Mahony 2013).
Decision Making Under Deep Uncertainty 2015, Delft
8
Figure 3: A Factor Tree for Public Support of Insurgency and Terrorism
For the present work we extended the Davis-O’Mahony methods to develop the Propensity
for Terrorism (PFT) model, a truncated version of which is shown in Figure 4. It depicts the
factors influencing an individual’s propensity to commit terrorism, and, thus, the threat posed by
the individual. Although not separately validated by social-science research, it builds on the
earlier work and seemed as a reasonably credible example. We used only the top layer that
asserts that the threat T posed by an individual is a function of that individual’s motivation (M),
perception of terrorism’s legitimacy (L), capability-opportunity (CO), and acceptability of costs
(A). These inputs can be informed by observations or inferences about the lower-level factors in
the tree, or by interpreting other data that might not connect straightforwardly to the causal
model. This would include using statistical information to inform base rates.
Decision Making Under Deep Uncertainty 2015, Delft
9
Figure 4. A Truncated Factor Tree of Propensity for Terrorism
.
We defined M, L, CO, and A so as to make them essentially independent, both logically and
probabilistically. This depends, however, on the model being used with data that has been
properly interpreted. Thus, we allow, by exception, for explicit correlations to be specified. For
example, if a given human source does not understand the model’s difference between
motivation for a cause and a sense of legitimacy in using terrorism tactics, then he may report M
and L as the same. Thus, his inputs on M and L would not be independent.
The PFT model is deliberately not that of a rational actor doing cost-benefit calculations.
Real individuals are affected by emotions, cognitive biases, and other non-rational
considerations. Further, they may not even have stable utility functions, instead “discovering”
their values as matters develop, rather as with “wicked problems” in the policy domain. Such
issues are discussed, with pointers to the literature, in a recent National Academy report about
deterrence (National Research Council 2014, 35ff) to which one of us (Davis) contributed.
Briefly, some technical elements of the PFT model are as follows.
We define the factors (variables) on an interval scale of 0 to 10, often using the discretized
scale of 1, 3, 5, 7, 9 with equally spaced values corresponding to very low, low, medium,
high, very high.
Although we don’t know the potentially complex actual functions describing the combined
effects at each node of a factor tree, we find that much can be accomplished with a
Decision Making Under Deep Uncertainty 2015, Delft
10
combination of two building-block functional forms that more or less bound ways to
represent nonlinear effects. We call them Thresholded Linear Weighted Sums (TLWS) and
Primary Factors (PF).
The TLWS method is akin to ordinary linear weighted sums, but it sets the result to 0 unless
each of the contributing variables exceeds its threshold. This addresses a number of practical
nonlinearities in a simple way. For example, if someone will very likely not become a
terrorist unless he is willing to accept associated costs and risks, then there is some threshold
level constituting “enough” acceptance.
The Primary Factors (PF) method states that the result is determined by the largest of the
contributing factors, or that plus a minor upward adjustment reflecting the next-biggest. For
example, an individual might have numerous sources of motivation, but the strength of his
motivation might be largely dictated by the biggest single one (e.g., extremist religion or a
love of danger and violence).
We developed the model (and the larger platform) with the Analytica® modeling platform. It
uses visual modeling that is largely understandable to people who are not “real”
programmers. Also, its modeling paradigm is closely related to the natural mathematics of
the problem: it exploits array mathematics, which makes multi-dimensional exploratory
analysis easy. Creating multidimensional visual displays requires more effort, as everyone
who does deep-uncertainty work. Figure 5 is one display that we have found comprehensible.
It was constructed in Excel with Analytica output. It shows results by color or number of a
cell, as a function of five parameters X1, X2, X3, X4, and X5.
Decision Making Under Deep Uncertainty 2015, Delft
11
Figure 5 An Illustrative Output of Exploratory Analysis
5 A Mixed-Methods Battery of Fusion Methods
We needed alternative fusion methods. We drew on the classic literature on basic information
theory (Jaynes and Bretthorst, 2003), Bayesian analysis (Gelman and Shalizi 2010), Dempster-
Shafer theory (Shafer 1976), and Dezert Smarandache theory (Smarandache and Dezert 2009a;
Smarandache and Dezert 2009b), Bayesian networks (Pearl, 2009), and several others as
surveyed in our earlier work (Davis, Perry, et al., 2013). We also drew on the literature on expert
forecasts and judgment (Clement and Winkler, 2007).
We considered four types of fusion method: (a) purely subjective, (b) nonlinear algebraic, (c)
quasi-Bayesian, and (d) a new entropy maximizing method (MEMP). All of these required
adaptation or new work. Our nonlinear algebraic methods use the TLWS and PF methods
discussed earlier. Our quasi-Bayesian method is “quasi” because we used heuristic methods to
determine the weight given to different evidence and our model does not represent the full set of
relationships and likelihoods.1 We also constructed alternative “generic” likelihood functions and
routinely show results for all of them because the “real” likelihood function is often unknowable.
Finally, the ME/MP method comes from the perspective of information-theory entropy and uses
methods from the machine-learning literature, such as those on regularization (see Davis, et al.
1 Bayesian-network approaches can use more complex relationships. These require uncertain parameterization of
likelihood functions and management of the resulting uncertainty. Potential problems include false precision and
systematic model errors (Small and Fishbeck, 1999), which can be much worse than the problems from our
simplifications. Using such models correctly can also be computationally intractable or at least very difficult.
X1
X2
X3
X4
X4
X5
Decision Making Under Deep Uncertainty 2015, Delft
12
forthcoming for citations). Technically, the approach uses nonlinear programming for fusion. It
maximizes an objective function that includes a weighted sum of entropy-maximization terms
and terms minimizing contradictions with reports, such as a claim that a person’s motivation is in
the medium-to-high range, but no lower or higher. The method yields estimates of threat level
that are as conservative (i.e., uncertain, in an information-theoretic sense) as possible given what
has been reported, but with recognition that the reports’ assertions may not be correct.
Table 3 summarizes the methods. Since our information fusion involves multiple steps, we
distinguish between (1) combining factors to estimate threat T and (2) fusing across reports,
whether to improve the estimate of factors M, L, CO, and A, or to fuse the reports’ separate
estimates of T.
Table 3 Mixed Fusion Methods
Combine factors to
generate T for a given
report
Fuse threat
estimates across
reports
Fuse factors
across reports
Combine refined
factors to generate
T
Linear weighted sums
(LWS)
Linear weighted
sums (LWS)
Linear weighted
sums (LWS)
Linear weighted
sums (LWS)
Thresholded linear
weighted sums (TLWS)
Thresholded linear
weighted sums
(TLWS)
Thresholded
linear weighted
sums (TLWS)
Thresholded linear
weighted sums
(TLWS)
Primary factors (PF) Primary factors
(PF)
Primary factors
(PF)
Primary factors (PF)
Maximum
entropy/minimum
penalty (MEMP)
Maximum
entropy/minimum
penalty (MEMP)
Maximum
entropy/minimum
penalty (MEMP)
Maximum
entropy/minimum
penalty (MEMP)
Quasi-Bayes Quasi-Bayes
Note: Although methods are mostly the same for all columns, inputs and outputs are context dependent.
6 Data
The results of even the most sophisticated analysis are limited by the data itself. We were
doing research, not developing an application program. What should we use for data? It would
have been a major effort to obtain “real” data and, had we done so, it might well have been
classified or trivialized. More important scientifically, the data would not have really tested our
platform adequately because the data would be whatever happened to be available. We instead
created synthetic data to pose numerous challenges for our methods and platform—challenges
that we had identified early, such as dealing with ambiguities in information (e.g., bimodal inputs
Decision Making Under Deep Uncertainty 2015, Delft
13
corresponding to equivocation), contradictions, even possible deception. We also designed cases
that we suspected would show differences among methods.
This synthetic data took the form of narrative vignettes, followed by synthetic versions of
analyst interpretations of raw data.
Here we give merely one short example, a single report from a human agent, Agent B, about
an individual, Harry Smith, who is under scrutiny.
Agent B
Harry talks big and seems to see no problem at all with violence, even terrorist
violence, in support of the group’s objectives. I have to take that seriously,
although he might be just “talking big.”
It’s hard to tell how motivated Harry is to participate in the Slammers’ activity
and from my position in the club membership I do not know if he would be
provided with means and tools to participate in a violent act if he should choose
to do so. Interestingly, I did hear comments that suggest Harry is nonetheless
dubious about paying the cost and taking the risks associated with violent
action—even though he has endorsed violence as a legitimate route to right
society’s wrongs.
From my vantage point, Harry does not appear to be a threat—he likes to talk
big about the need for bringing down the system, but never wants to actually do
anything other than talk. The few times he’s been pushed he always comes up
with some excuse about taking care of some pressing need.
Such narrative information must be “interpreted” in terms of probability distributions for
Harry’s motivation, sense of legitimacy, capability, and willingness to accept costs and risks (M,
L, CO, and A). Those become the inputs for the analysis.
7 Designing and Implementing a Platform for Exploratory Analysis
Implementing the concept of Figure 1 involved more detailed design and some advanced
programming. The initial version of the platform was much more procedural and
straightforward—something an analyst who was not a programming expert could understand
within days or a few weeks. That, however, hard-wired many of the choices we saw as
important. Thus, we redesigned to achieve the flexibilities discussed earlier in connection with
Figure 1. This involved tradeoffs. To our biased eyes, the design seems elegant, reviewable, and
maintainable while maintaining the uncertainty information. That is so, however, only for those
who have paid the price of a steeper learning curve than is required for more usual programming.
As an example, a significant meta-method issue is whether to combine the probability
distributions for factors M, L, CO, and A for each report to generate a threat estimate T, and then
fuse those T estimates across reports, or to fuse factors across reports to improve the estimated
distributions for M, L, CO, and A, and then combine to estimate T. A number of such choices
exist and—lacking settled theory and solid data—no a priori reason exists for believing that one
Decision Making Under Deep Uncertainty 2015, Delft
14
is “right.” The best choice depends on the individual case and its data. This is analogous to
empirical statistical analysis where data-cleaning and model choice are often justified
heuristically on a case-by-case basis.
One way to think about the structural issues around which we had to design is to think of the
meta-level fusion as performed by operators as indicated in Figure 6. We have to operate on the
data to map the raw data into the inputs of the platform; we have to assign the data to each of the
streams; we have to decide on what order we process reports; we have to decide on when and
how to combine and fuse; and we have to decide on when to fuse across reports rather than
streams. Some of these operators don’t commute. The answers are different if we combine first
rather than fuse first, etc.
Figure 6. Operators Employed in the Information Fusion
The resulting dimensionality is suggested by Table 5, which shows choices available for four
of the structural issues and Table 5, which discusses data-grouping issues. The structural issues
in Table 4 establish 48 analytical paths, each with uncertain parameters, as well as the choices
indicated in Table 5. Exploratory analysis can generate tens of thousands of distinguishable
cases, or more. It’s best not to dwell on the number because it isn’t conceptually important, or
even computationally limiting at this stage, although applications of exploratory analysis benefit
from supercomputers.
Table 5: The Primary Dimensions of Structural Uncertainty
Stream and Model Combine or Fuse First? Combining Method? Fusion Method
A (with Propensity for
Terrorism model, PFT)
Combine first TLWS (Thresholded
linear weighted sums)
TLWS (Thresholded
linear weighted sums)*
B (with a variant model) Fuse first PF (Primary Factors)* PF (Primary Factors)*
MEMP (Maximum
Entropy/Minimum
MEMP (Maximum
Entropy/Minimum
Decision Making Under Deep Uncertainty 2015, Delft
15
Penalty)* Penalty)*
Quasi-Bayesian*
Note: All the methods include tuning parameters such as weights, thresholds, or maximum adjustments.
Decision Making Under Deep Uncertainty 2015, Delft
16
Table 6 Illustrative Data Groupings
Individual Order of Report Processing Report Weightings (for
credibility…)
Harry As received (chronological) Uniform
Ahmed Reverse order (newest first) Through Lens 1
Arbitrary 1 (e.g., best source first) Through Lens 2
Arbitrary 2 …
To elaborate slightly, we dealt with such organizational complexity as follows. At the visual-
modeling level we treated the stream and the combine/fuse order as explicitly distinct flows, as
in the architecture of Figure 1. Where possible, we represented the various operators mentioned
above with functions. These functions have parameters to deal with structural issues and some
data-group issues. Analytica deals with all of this using array mathematics. The result is that the
mathematics of the heterogeneous fusion can be expressed compactly. For example, the node at
which threat estimates are to be fused across reports is defined as a table, as in Table 7. The
definition specifies that all four fusion methods will be used, each with its own function. The
arguments specify on what data the functions are to operate. Thus, what appears to be a simple
table of functions is actually a table of functions with multidimensional arrays of probabilities as
inputs and new multidimensional arrays of probabilities as outputs. The design allows more
extensive and comprehensible exploratory analysis that explains what assumptions and choices
are affecting results.
Table 7. The Definition of the Node Accomplishing Fusion Across Reports
Fusion
Method
PF Primary_Factor_Funct (Combined_Threat, R_ind, Tau, Final_Rpt_Wts_Agg, Min_Q_for_PF)
TLWS TLWS_Function(MEMP_Fix_R_Threat,Final_Rpt_Wts_Agg, R_Ind, Threshold:4)
Bayes Bayes_fx_TD(MEMP_Fix_R_Threat,R_Ind, Final_Rpt_Wts_Agg, Likelihood, Report_Order)
MEMP Continuous_MEM_Threat[Harry_or_Ahmed_Index=Choose_Harry_or_Ahmed]
Decision Making Under Deep Uncertainty 2015, Delft
17
8 Illustrative Results and Conclusions
8.1 Results
Mostly to illustrate that the design was achieved and that the platform runs, Figure 7 shows
illustrative but simplified results for one case. It shows the probabilities, after fusion, for
assigning an individual, Harry Smith, to one of three categories: threat, gray-area, or non-threat
(corresponding to cumulative probabilities of T between 6 and 10, 4 to 6, and 0 to 4). Results are
shown as a function of fusion method. The dashed lines indicate what the assessment was with
just the initial information. The “slicer bars” at the top indicate major contributors to the result
beyond the choice of fusion method. For the example, in this particular projection of results, the
TLWS method was used to estimate threat by combining factor values, Quasi-Bayesian fusion
was accomplished using a postulated “asymmetric” likelihood function, and the reports were
processed in the order received. Such parameter values can be changed interactively by clicking
through their menus (note arrows). This is interactive exploratory analysis.
We see that in this fusion greatly increases the likelihood ascribed to Harry being a threat.
The primary factors method is extreme in this regard, as one would expect, but a rather striking
result is that the Bayesian method drops the estimate by a factor of 4 (0.28 to 0.07)! This doesn’t
exonerate Harry, but it strongly suggests that he is not a terrorist. But what if we used other
fusion methods? Would we get the same answer? Not necessarily. Seeing discrepancies tells us
to look more deeply into the particulars of Harry’s case, perhaps all the way back to raw data.
After doing so, we will probably be able to focus on one or two fusion method and refine the
tuning. Again, however, this envisions an intelligent analyst-centric process, not an automated
statistical analysis.
Decision Making Under Deep Uncertainty 2015, Delft
18
Figure 7: Illustrative Results from Prototype Experiments (not chosen for drama)
8.2 Conclusions
By the end of our project, the methods were falling into place, the prototype analytical
platform was operating and we saw significant consequences of going about heterogeneous
fusion in different ways. This was “good,” not “bad,” because we had used the mixed-method
approach precisely because we expected discrepancies and the need to look at the problem from
different perspectives. Follow-up analysis would be different depending on context. For
example, if we were desperately trying to find the most plausible suspect among a set of people,
we might “look for trouble,” choosing methods and tuning parameters accordingly. If instead we
were trying to objectively and dispassionately assess threat likelihoods, we would do something
else. And, finally, if we were second-guessing the decision to regard someone as a probable
terrorist, we would look to find what formation elements were most critical in that assessment. If
one element had particularly high leverage, then we would scrutinize it in more detail and seek
new information to corroborate or disconfirm it. The result might be exoneration.
Decision Making Under Deep Uncertainty 2015, Delft
19
We conclude that such fusion methods have promise for increasing the probability of
detecting the rare potential terrorist, decreasing false alarms, and increasing the probability of
exonerating individuals who might otherwise be falsely assessed. Much future work will be
needed, however, to determine actual value in real-world settings. We were merely establishing
some groundwork for next steps.
Acknowledgments
This paper is based on prior research sponsored by the Office of Naval Research and the Office
of the Secretary of Defense.
References
Clemen, Robert T., and Robert L. Winkler (2007) “Aggregation of Expert Probability Judgments,” in
Wade Edwards, Miles, Ralph F, and Detlof von Winterfeldt, eds., Advances in Decision Analysis:
from Foundations to Applications, pp. 154-176.
Davis, Paul K. (2012), Some Lessons From RAND’s Work on Planning Under Uncertainty for National
Security, Santa Monica Calif.: RAND Corp.
Davis, Paul K. (2003), “Exploratory Analysis and Implications for Modeling,” in New Challenges, New
Tools, edited by Stuart Johnson, Martin Libicki, and Gregory Treverton, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND
Corp., 255-83.
Davis, Paul K., and Kim Cragin, eds. (2009), Social Science for Counterterrorism: Putting the Pieces
Together, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corp.
Davis, Paul K. Eric Larson, et al. (2012), Understanding and Influencing Public Support for Insurgency
and Terrorism, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corp.
Davis, Paul K., and Angela O’Mahony (2013). A Computational Model of Public Support for Insurgency
and Terrorism: A Prototype for More General Social-Science Modeling.” Santa Monica, Calif.:
RAND Corp.
Davis, Paul K., Walter S. Perry, Ryan Andrew Brown, Douglas Yeung, Parisa Roshan, and Phoenix
Voorhies (2013). Using Behavioral Indicators to Help Detect Potential Violent Acts, Santa Monica,
Calif.: RAND Corp.
Davis, Paul K., Walter L. Perry, John Hollywood, and David Manheim (2015a), Uncertainty Sensitive
Heterogeneous Information Fusion: Assessing Threat with Soft, Uncertain, and Conflicting Evidence,
Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND, forthcoming.
Davis, Paul K., Walter L. Perry, John Hollywood, and David Manheim (2015b), "Using Causal Models in
Heterogeneous Information Fusion To Detect Terrorists," in Proceedings of the 2015 Winter
Simulation Conference, edited by L. Yilmaz, K.V. Chan, I. Moon, T.M. Roeder, C. Macal, and M. D.
Rossetti.
Decision Making Under Deep Uncertainty 2015, Delft
20
Gelman, Andrew, and Cosma Rohilla Shalizi (2010). “Philosophy and the Practice of Bayesian
Statistics,” British Journal of Mathematical Statistics and Pscyhology, 66, pp. 8-38.
Jaynes, Edwin T., and G. Larry Bretthorst (ed.) (2003) , Probability Theory: The Logic of Science,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kahneman, Daniel. (2011). Thinking, Fast and Slow, New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
Lempert, Robert J., David G. Groves, Steven W. Popper, and Steven C. Bankes (2006), “A General
Analytic Method for Generating Robust Strategies and Narrative Scenarios,” Management Science 4,
April 514–28.
Lempert, Robert J., Steven W. Popper, and Steven C. Bankes, Shaping the Next One Hundred Years: New
Methods for Quantitative Long-term Policy Analysis, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND.
Mitchell J. Small & Paul S. Fischbeck (1999), “False Precision in Bayesian Updating with Incomplete
Models,” Human and Ecological Risk Assessment, An International Journal, 5:2, 291-304.
National Research Council (2014), U.S. Air Force Strategic Deterrence Analytic Capabilities: An
Assessment of Methods, Tools, and Approaches for the 21st Century Security Environment,
Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press.
Pearl, Judea (2009), Causality: Models, Reasoning, and Inference, Cambridge, Mass.: Cambridge
University Press.
Rosenhead, Jonathan, and John Mingers (2002). “A New Paradigm of Analysis,” In Rational Analysis or
a Problematic World Revisited: Problem Structuring Methods for Complexity, Uncertainty and
Conflict, edited by Jonathan Rosenhead, and John Mingers, 1–19. Chichester, UK: John Wiley &
Sons, Inc.
Shafer, Glenn (1976). A Mathematical Theory of Evidence, Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University
Press.
Smarandache, Florentin, and Jean Dezert, eds. (2009a), Advances and Applications of DsMT for
Information Fusion. Rehoboth: American Research Press.
Walker, Warren E., Robert J. Lempert, and Han H. Kwakkel (2013), “Deep Uncertainty,” in S. Gass, and
M. Fu, eds., Encyclopedia of Operations Research and Management Science, 3d ed., Springer.
Author Biographies
Paul K. Davis is a senior principal researcher at RAND and a professor of policy analysis in the
Pardee RAND Graduate School. He is a graduate of the University of Michigan (B.S.) and
Massachusetts Institute for Technology (Ph.D. in Chemical Physics). His research has included
such diverse subjects as strategic planning; deterrence theory; counterterrorism theory; modeling,
including cognitive modeling of adversaries and multi-resolution modeling more generally; and
complex information fusion to assist threat detection. His email address is
paul_k_davis@me.com.
David Manheim is a doctoral fellow in the Pardee RAND Graduate School and an Assistant
Policy Analyst at RAND. His focus is decision support, risk analysis, and value of information.
He holds a B.S. in Mathematics from Lander College, where he concentrated on abstract
mathematics and financial modeling. His research includes understanding resilience in different
Decision Making Under Deep Uncertainty 2015, Delft
21
contexts, and several projects on how mathematical and computer modeling can inform decisions
under uncertainty. His email address is dmanheim@rand.org.
Walter L. Perry is a senior information scientist at RAND. He received his Ph.D. at George
Mason University after retiring from the U.S. Army’s Signal Corps. He has taught electrical
engineering, computer science, statistics, and mathematics. His research has included leading
official reviews for the Army of operations in Kosovo, Afghanistan, and Iraq. More technically,
his research has included methods for data fusion and information-processing, and for complex
information fusion to assist threat detection. His email address is walt@rand.org.
John S. Hollywood is a full operations researcher at RAND and a professor of policy analysis at
the Pardee RAND Graduate School, where he applies qualitative and quantitative analytics to
security policy, including criminal justice, homeland security, counterinsurgency, and defense
systems. He holds an SB in Applied Mathematics and a Ph.D. in Operations Research from the
Massachusetts Institute for Technology. His email address is johnsh@rand.org.